
The Best 
Of 
Isaac Asimov 
ISAAC ASIMOV 
Copyright © 1973 
Contents 
Introduction
Marooned Off Vesta
Nightfall
C-Chute
The Martian Way
The Deep
The Fun They Had
The Last Question
The Dead Past
The Dying Night
Anniversary
The Billiard Ball
Mirror Image
            Introduction            
I must admit the title of this book gives me pause. Who says the enclosed stories are my ‘best’? Do I? Does 
the editor? Or some critic? Some reader? A genera
l vote among the entire population of the world?  
And whoever says it--can it be so? Can the word 
‘best’ mean anything at all, except to some 
particular person in some particular mood? Perhaps no
t--so if we allow the word 
to stand as an absolute, 
you, or you, or perhaps you, may be appalled at omissions or inclusions or, never having read me before, 
may even be impelled to cry out, ‘Good heavens, are 
those 
his 
best?’  
So I’ll be honest with all of you. What is included here in this book are a dozen stories chosen in 
such a way as to span a third of a century of writing,
 with two early samples, two late samples, and eight 
from the gold decade (for me) of the Fifties. Those pres
ented are as nearly representative as is consistent 
with the careful selection of good stories (i.e. those 
the editor and I like), and as nearly the best of my 
stories as is consistent with making them representative.  
I suppose we ought really call the book, ‘The Pretty Good and Pretty Representative Stories of 
Isaac Asimov’, but who would then buy it? So ‘best’ it is.  
As to the individual stories-- 
(1) ‘Marooned Off Vesta’ was the very first story 
I ever published, so its inclusion is virtually a 
necessity. It wasn’t the first I ever
 wrote with the hope of publication. Actually, it was the third. The first 
was never sold and no longer exists; the second was sold a couple of years after it was written, but is not 
very good.  
Far be it from me to crave indulgence, but I think it is important to understand that at the time I 
wrote and sold the story (in 1938) I was eighteen years old and had spent all the years I could remember in 
a city-slum. My vision of strong adventurers bravely facing danger in distant vastnesses was just that--
visionary.  
(2) ‘Nightfall’, written two and a half years late
r, was the thirty-second story I had written (what 
else did I have to do in those days except work in
 my father’s candy store and study for my college 
degrees) and perhaps the fourteenth story published.  
Yet within less than three years of th
e start of my career it turned out that I 
had 
written the best of 
Asimov. At least, ‘Nightfall’ has been frequently reprin
ted, is commonly referred to as a ‘classic’, and when 
some magazine, or fan organization, conducts a vote on short stories, it frequently ends up on the top of the 
list--not only of my stories but of anybody’s. One of 
its advantages is that it has a unique plot. There was 
nothing resembling it ever published before (as far as I know) and of course, it is now so well known that 
nothing like it can be published again. It’s nice to have 
one 
story like that, anyway.  
Yet I was only twenty-one when I wrote it and was still feeling my way. It isn’t 
my 
favorite. Later 
on, I’ll tell you what my favorite is and you can then judge for yourself.  
(3) ‘C-Chute’ comes after a ten-year hiatus, as
 far as the stories included in this book are 
concerned. I hadn’t quit writing of course, don’t think that. To be sure, I had slowed down a bit, what with 
the war and the time-consuming effort toward the doctorate, but the real reason for the gap is that I spent 
most of the Forties writing the stories collected in my books 
I, Robot 
and 
The Foundation Trilogy. 
It 
seemed inadvisable to amputate portions
 of either for this collection.  
‘C-Chute’ comes near the beginning of my ‘mature’ period (or whatever you want to call it). I had 
my Ph.D.; I was an Assistant Professor of Biochemistry at Boston University School of Medicine; I had 
published my first three books, and I was full of self-confidence. What’s more I had broken away from 
exclusive dependence on 
Astounding Science Fiction. 
New magazines had arisen to challenge its 
leadership, notably 
Galaxy, 
and also 
Fantasy and Science Fiction. 
‘C-Chute’ appeared in 
Galaxy. 
So did the 
next two stories in the collection. 
(4) ‘The Martian Way’ represents my reaction to 
the McCarthy era, a time, in the early fifties, 
when Americans seemed to abandon 
their own history and become, in some cases, witch-hunters; in some 
cases, victims; and in most cases, cowards. (Brave 
men remained, fortunately, which is why we pulled out 
of it.) ‘The Martian Way’, written and published at the height of the McCarthy era, was my own personal 
statement of position. I felt very brave at the time and was disappointed that no one ever as much as 
frowned at me in consequence. I must have been too subtle--or too unimportant.  
A second point about the story is that I managed to foresee something accurately, Science fiction 
writers are often assumed to be keen-eyed peerers-into-the-future who see things others don’t. Actually, few 
writers have much of a record in this respect and mine, 
at best, can only be said to attain the abysmally-low 
average. Just the same, in ‘The Martian Way’, I desc
ribed the euphoric effects of the spacewalk fifteen 
years before anyone had space-walked--and then, wh
en they did, euphoria is apparently what they 
experienced.  
(5) ‘The Deep’ is the sleeper of the collection. 
Every once in a while I wrote a story which, though 
good in my opinion (and I don’t like 
all 
my stories), seems to stir up no reaction. This is one of them. 
Perhaps it’s because I deliberately chose to describe 
a society in which mother-love was a crime and the 
world wasn’t ready for that 
(6) ‘The Fun They Had’ is probably the biggest surprise of my literary career. A personal friend 
asked me to write a little science fiction story for a s
yndicated boys-and-girls newspaper page he edited and 
I agreed for friendship’s sake. I expected it would appear in a few newspapers for one day and would then 
disappear forever.  
              However,              
Fantasy and Science Fiction 
picked it up and, to my surprise, the reprint requests began 
to come in. It has been reprinted at least thirty time
s, and there has been no time in perhaps fifteen years 
(including right now) when new reprints haven’t been pending.  
Why? I don’t know why. If I had the critic’s mentality (which I emphatically don’t) I would sit 
down and try to analyze my stories,
 work out the factors that make 
some more successful than others, 
cultivate those factors, and simply explode with excellence.  
But the devil with that. I won’t buy success at th
e price of self-consciousness. I don’t have the 
temperament for it. f11 write as I please. and let the 
critics do the analyzing. (Yesterday, someone said to 
me that a critic was like a eunuch in a harem. He coul
d observe, study, and analyze--but he couldn’t do it 
himself.)  
(7) ‘The Last Question’ is my personal favorite, the one story I made sure would not be omitted 
from this collection.  
Why is it my favorite? For one thing I got the idea all at once and didn’t have to fiddle with it; and 
I wrote it in whiteheat and scarcely had to change a word. 
This sort of thing endears any story to any writer.  
Then, too, it has had the strangest effect on my readers. Frequently someone writes to ask me if I 
can write them the name of a story, which they 
think 
I may have written, and tell them where to find it. 
They don’t remember the title but when they describe the story it is invariably ‘The Last Question’. This 
has reached the point where I rece
ntly received a long-d
istance phone call from a desperate man who 
began, ‘Dr. Asimov, there’s a story I think you wrote, whose title I can’t remember--’ at which point I 
interrupted to tell him it was ‘The Last Question’ and when I described the plot it proved to be indeed the 
story he was after. I left him convinced I could read minds at a distance of a thousand miles.  
No other story I have written has anything like 
this effect on my readers--producing at once an 
unshakeable memory of the plot and an unshakeable forgettery of the title and even author. I think it may be 
that the story fills them so frighteningly full, th
at they can retain none
 of the side-issues.  
(8) ‘The Dead Past’ was written after I had been 
teaching for seven years.
 I was as saturated as 
could be with the world of scientific research.  
Naturally, anyone who writes is going to reveal 
the world in which he is immersed, whether he 
wants to or desperately wants not to. I’ve never tried to avoid letting my personal background creep into 
my stories, but I must admit it has rarely crep
t in quite as thickly as it did in this one.  
As an example of how my stories work out, consider this-- 
I had my protagonist interested in Carthage becau
se I myself am a great admirer of Hannibal and 
have never quite gotten over the Battle of Zama. I in
troduced Carthage, idly, without any intention of 
weaving it into the plot. But it got woven in just the same.  
That happens to me over and over. Some writers work out the stories in meticulous detail before 
starting, and stick to the outline. P. G. Wodehouse does it, I understand, and I worship his books. But just 
the same I don’t. I work out my ending, decide on
 a beginning and then proceed, letting everything in-
between work itself out as I come to it.  
(9) ‘The Dying Night’ is an example of a mystery 
as well as a science fiction story, I have been a 
mystery reader as long as I have been a science fictio
n reader and, on the whole, I think I enjoy mysteries 
more.  
I’m not sure why that is. Perhaps it was that af
ter I became an established science fiction writer I 
was no longer able to relax with science fiction stor
ies. I read every story keenly aware that it might be 
worse than mine, in which case I had no patience with it, or that it might be better, in which case I felt 
miserable.  
Mysteries, especially the intellectual puzzle variety (ah, good old Hercule Poirot), offered me no 
such stumbling blocks. Sooner or later, then, I was bound to try my hand at science fiction mysteries and 
‘The Dying Night’ is one of these.  
(10), Anniversary’ was written to fulfill a request--t
hat I write a story for the March, 1959, issue of 
Amazing Stories 
as a way of celebrating the twentieth annive
rsary of the March, 1939, issue, which had 
contained my first published story, ‘Marooned Off Vesta’, So (inevitably) I wrote a story dealing with the 
characters of ‘Marooned Off Vesta’ twenty years later.
 The magazine then ran both stories together, and I 
was sure someone would send me a letter saying that my writing was better in the first story, but no one 
did. (Perhaps a reader of this b
ook will decide it would be humorous to do so, but if so, please restrain 
yourself.)  
(11) ‘The Billiard Ball’ comes, in this collection,
 after an eight-year hiatus and is an example of 
my ‘late’ style. (That is, if there is such a thing. Some
 critics say that it is a flaw in my literary nature that I 
haven’t grown; that my late stories have the same style and aura of my early stories. Maybe you’ll think so, 
too, and scorn me in consequence--but then, I’ve already told you what some people think of critics.)  
The reason for the hiatus is that
 in 1958 I quit the academic life to become a full-time writer. I at 
once proceeded to write everything u
nder the sun (straight science, straight mystery, children’s books, 
histories, literary annotations, etymology, humor, etc., etc.) 
except 
science fiction. I never entirely 
abandoned it, of course--witness ‘The Billiard Ball’.  
(12) ‘Mirror Image’ is a par
ticularly recent science fictio
n short story I’ve written for the 
magazines and, unlike the first eleven stories, has not yet had time to be reprinted.  
One of the reasons for writing it was to appease 
those readers who were forever asking me for 
sequels; for one more book involving characters who have appeared in previous books. One of the most 
frequent requests was that I write a third novel to succeed 
The Caves of Steel 
and 
The Naked Sun, 
both of 
which dealt with the adventures of the detective, Elij
ah Baley, and his robot-assi
stant, R. Daneel Olivaw. 
Unable to find the time to do so, I wrote a short story about them--’Mirror-Image’.  
Alas, all I got as a result were a spate of letters saying, ‘Thanks, but we mean a 
novel.’  
Anyway, there you are. Turn the page and you can begin a representative, and possibly a more or 
less ‘best’, 115,000 words or so out 
of the roughly 2,000,000 words of science fiction I have written so far. 
